---
title: "Milestone 1"
attendees:
  - @waalge
  - @nhenin
  - @paluh
---

## Agenda

- The spec discussion (Squashes, Subs, PTLC, etc.)

### Actionables

- PTLC description in the spec (@nhenin).

- Create short ADR about subs (@paluh, @waalge).

- Create an outline of the article about BLN vs CLN (@paluh, @nhenin).

- ADR for multiasset support (one way or the other) (@paluh, @waalge - devil's advocate).

### Suggestions

- Please split the milestone points as you go into subtasks and mark what you are doing at the moment.

### Next meeting

- 2024-09-06 0600UTC (@paluh to host)
